What Is Life?
A Brief Historical Overview
by Antonio Lazcano
Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM, Apdo. Postal 70-407, Cd. Universitaria, 04510 Mexico, D.F., Mexico
(e-mail: alar@correo.unam.mx)
Dedicated to the memories of Leslie E. Orgel and Stanley L. Miller
1. I Sing the Body Electric. – After many years of experimentation on the effects
of electricity on frog legs, in 1791 Luigi Galvani published his Commentary on the
Effects of Electricity on Muscular Motion, summarizing the observations that had led
him to believe in the existence of -animal electricity. that originated in the brain, and
traveled through nerves and muscles. A child of the Enlightenment, Galvani was no
mystic, and the fascination that his observations awoke in both his colleagues and the
lay public (which are echoed in Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley.s masterpiece Franken-
stein) must be understood as part of the process of secularization that life sciences
underwent through this period: Galvani was, in fact, attempting to explain the nature of
life itself on the basis of a purely physical phenomenon. As shown by the 19th century
efforts to describe the basic properties of life on the basis of magnetism, surface
tension, radioactivity, and other physical phenomena [1], Galvani and others had
initiated a scientific trend that has continued for over two centuries.
In a way, Erwin Schroedinger.s famous book What is life? [2] can be seen as part of
this trend. Schroedinger.s text should be read not as the starting point of the appeal that
biological phenomena had over many physicists, but rather as the culmination of a long
tradition that attempted to explain the nature of life in physical terms. What is generally
not realized is that Schroedinger did not include in his book a single reference to
biology. This is quite surprising, especially since many of his contemporaries were
already having important insights when addressing basic properties of life such as
heredity. A few years before What is life? was published, for instance, John B. S.
Haldane wrote that -...two possibilities are now open. The gene is a catalyst making a
particular antigen, or the antigen is simply the gene or part of it let loose from its
connection with the chromosome. The gene has two properties. It intervenes in
metabolism, sometimes at least by making a definitive substance. And it reproduces itself.
The gene, considered as a molecule, must be spread out in a layer one building block
deep. Otherwise it could not be copied. The most likely method of copying is by a process
analogous to crystallization, a second similar layer of building block being laid down on
the first. But we could conceive of a process analogous to the copying of a gramophone
record by the intermediation of a +negative, perhaps related to the original as an antibody
to an antigen....
